Hello,
Warm welcome to the W3C Web & Machine Learning workshop.
I am Dominique Hazael-Massieux,
I am part of the W3C technical staff
and have been working with the Workshop Program Committee
in organizing this virtual event.
You can find me on twitter and github
as @dontcallmeDOM
(but do call me Dom).
This talk aims to give a very high-level overview
of the specificities of
what we call the Web platform
for those of you who may not be as familiar
with how browsers work.
Since a lot of the existing Machine Learning development
happens in non-Web environments,
the Program Committee thought
it would be useful that we build a shared understanding
of these specificities and how it impacts
the deployment of new technologies in Web browsers.
So what is it that we call the Web platform?
The simplest way to approach that question
is through a technology stack lens:
most devices with an internet connection provide their users
with at least one browser
that can fetch content over HTTP (and a few other network protocols)
, render HTML content styled with Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)
and interpret JavaScript code that can interact with that content
through a set of APIs called the Document Object Model (DOM).
Browsers also provide a large and growing number of JavaScript APIs
that enable interacting with various hardware and OS capabilities.
For the past couple of years,
browsers have also provided a native-performance bytecode
called WebAssembly that among other things
let compile existing non-JavaScript codebase
into browser-runnable applications.
So that's for the technology stack
that constitutes the Web platform.
But there are four key aspects I want to highlight today
that make browsers a unique execution environment:
a first aspect is that browsers are built
with networking as a core design point
this means that it is relatively easy
to bring in resources from different network sources,
but it also comes with constraints in that usage:
in particular, a lot of the trust and security boundaries
are anchored in network identifers,
mostly via DNS and certificates
a second aspect is that browsers are designed as user agents
they are positioned to be the agent of end users.
They are expected to keep the user in control
and help ensure their needs are fulfilled
W3C pays particular attention to considerations of
security, privacy, accessibility and internalization
when it comes to user needs.
To respect that position agent of the user,
it is often necessary to impose limits
to what developers can do in the code
that browsers will run for them.
a third important aspect is that
all the technologies that constitute the platform
are defined through open standardization processes,
including naturally in W3C,
and these standards are implemented
in multiple competing products
and are made available freely to developers
and end-users alike.
finally, browsers are available on most end-user devices,
no matter their operating system and their hardware,
including computing architectures and capabilities.
In particular, technologies made available through browsers
need to be as device- and platform-independent as possible,
and provide accommodations for situations where they cannot be.
With that characterization in mind,
what does it imply when it comes to bringing
a new technology such as machine learning
to the Web platform ?
A first characteristic is that in most cases,
any technology that requires imperative programming
will need to be exposed via JavaScript,
and thus inherits the specificities of the JavaScript language:
JavaScript operates under a single-threaded event loop.
This means developers mostly aren't exposed to concurreny issues,
which is a good thing,
but it also creates constraints
in how programs can be architected.
In particular, in browsers, the main JavaScript event loop
can block the rendering or interactivity of the page that loaded it
so running blocking synchronous operations
or other heavy processing in that context
can very rapidly deteriorate the user experience.
Various mechanisms are available to enable developers
to run different pieces of their code concurrently,
most notably asynchonous APIs, workers and worklets,
but they come with their own set of execution constraints.
The high level consideration to keep in mind is
that technologies that require heavy CPU operations
need to carefully integrate with these architectural constraints.
A second characteristic is that
from within a Web application,
most interactions with the network will by default
be limited to the domain of where the application is hosted
(more specifically, its origin),
and access to other network destinations will only be granted
if that other destination opts-in to it.
This helps limit exposures to private resources in local networks
(for instance a home network or an enterprise network).
In the context of machine learning, this means that
for instance, loading a trained model from a third party service
would need to conform to this constraint
and may also need additional sandboxing to respect
the end user security and privacy.
A third similar characteristic,
and one of rapidly growing importance,
is that browsers limit what identifiable information
can be tracked across Web sites:
while a lot of parties attempt to identify users
as they browse through different Web sites,
browsers attempt to give users control on what gets shared
and when and how to limit what gets shared without user awareness.
In particular, a lot of the recent evolutions in
how “cookies” are managed,
how data gets stored and
how much uniquely-identifiable data is exposed in APIs
(that data can be used to “fingerprint”
a particular user or a particular device),
a lot of these evolutions can have deep impact
in how new Web technologies get designed.
As a final characteristic to call attention to
in the context of bringing Machine Learning to the Web,
Web technologies need to be designed
to run across many different platform and architectures.
Machine learning tends to be very compute-intensive
and thus would generally need a lot of optimization
to run as efficiently as possible;
while these optimizations are definitely relevant
in the context of the Web platform,
they need to be exposed to developers in a way
that let browsers run these optimizations
on all the devices they operate on.
In some cases, the lack of specific hardware
makes running a given application likely not worth it
various mechanisms of feature detection and context establishment
have been deployed in other technologies
(for instance, detecting the availability of
virtual reality gear in WebXR)
and they let developers determine if and how
to adapt their application to the specific end user context,
while preserving as much as possible the user privacy.
For people coming from other execution environments,
these constraints can sometimes appear overwhelming,
and in truth, they can in fact be pretty challenging
to address in a number of cases
a good chunk of the open standardization process
that W3C hosts revolve around finding the right trade-offs
among the competing needs they represent.
Naturally, these constraints don't exist in a vacuum
they are the pilars that have enabled the Web platform
to grow to be the most deployed software platform,
available to more than 4 billion people around the globe,
and with the largest community of developers available.
W3C has built processes, culture and institutional knowledge
to ensure that the Web platform keeps pace
with the evolving capabilities of computing devices
while preserving the characteristics
that make the Web the most universal platform available.
I hope the presentations and discussions at the workshop
will pave the way for Machine Learning to bring
its capabilities to the service of the many billions of users
that rely on Web browsers in their daily life,
and I hope this presentation helped better understand
what it means to bring Machine Learning capabilities
to the Web platform.
Thank you for your time.